Approved Language
=================
*****************

<!--
Documents included:
    + LMH Quarterly Report (Oct-Dec 2014)
    + LMH Quarterly Report (Jan-Mar 2015)
    + LMH Quarterly Report (Apr-Jun 2015)
    + LMH Annual Report (2014-2015)
    
    - kbs
    - lms rivercess
    - mnh audit
    - cma
-->


### Ebola Response

- The Ebola outbreak devastated the local health system, with health facilities across the country shutting their doors 
because health facility staff lacked the training and supplies needed to keep themselves safe. This meant that if a 
woman living in a remote village was about to give birth or needed medication for her child, her options were extremely 
limited.

- Working with the Rivercess and Grand Gedeh County Health Teams, Last Mile Health executed a coordinated Ebola 
response effort and laid the foundations for rebuilding a resilient health system for all `twelve` health districts of 
Rivercess and Grand Gedeh Counties, home to roughly `177,204` people.

- LMH trained a total of `1,382` health workers and community members across the two counties to respond to the 
outbreak, including 181 community health workers and `340` health facility staff. Community trainings enabled 
participants to recognize the danger signs and symptoms of Ebola, deliver Ebola awareness and prevention messages to 
community members, and isolate/refer suspected cases. Health facility trainings emphasized infection prevention and 
control (IPC) best practices, referral procedures, and clinical case management.

- In total, Last Mile Health CHWs screened over `10,000` community members for Ebola and provided nearly `12,000` 
education and awareness talks in remote communities. LMH medical teams visited all 38 health facilities in Grand Gedeh 
and Rivercess Counties, training staff in effective infection prevention and control (IPC) measures. LMH-developed IPC 
training materials and protocols for health facilities were shared widely and adopted by multiple organizations across 
the country involved with the Ebola response. Additionally, through the establishment of a MESH (Monitoring & Enhanced 
Supervision of Health facilities) program, LMH followed up monthly with facilities to troubleshoot problems and ensure 
that standards were being maintained.

- All LMH trained workers were able to "keep safe and keep serving" to ensure that remote communities still had access 
to essential health services at the height of the crisis. LMH’s CHWs treated more than `8,820` cases of childhood 
malaria, pneumonia, and diarrhea, while services in surrounding areas were tragically suspended. The number of women 
delivering in a facility in Konobo District fell by a mere `3%`, compared to the national average which decreased 
three-fold. LMH partnered with Direct Relief to distribute a remarkable `22` tons of IPC supplies to the facilities to 
ensure that they were properly equipped.


### Remoteness / Where We Work

- Rivercess is the poorest county in Liberia, with `71.3%` of the population falling within the bottom 20% income 
bracket of the country. It is also the lowest in terms of female education (only `9.9%` of women attended high school), 
and has the lowest full-vaccination rate in Liberia, at `33.1%`. Rivercess has the lowest treatment rate in Liberia for 
children with fever (`41.8%`), the highest prevalence of ARI (`12.2%`), and the second-highest prevalence of diarrhea 
(`32.1%`). Additionally, `73.7%` of women reported "distance to health facility" as a serious problem in accessing 
healthcare, more than in any other county.

- Gboe-Ploe is one of the most remote areas in all of Liberia. The dense jungle and sprawling creeks and rivers leave 
all but one community entirely inaccessible by vehicles and motorbikes; inhabitants of some villages have to walk 
nearly 24 hours before reaching the closest health faciliy. There is no cell service, no electricity, no safe water or 
latrines, and no external organizations working in the region.

- When LMH started working in Konobo, the average age at death was a mere `28.6` years (LMH Konobo Baseline Survey, 
2012).


### RM&E Team Accomplishments

- The RM&E team recently published a paper in the Journal of Global Health, titled *Remoteness and maternal and child 
health service utilization in rural Liberia: A population-based survey*. John Kraemer, RM&E Senior Technical Advisor 
and contributing author, described how "it's no surprise that those who live in rural areas are less likely to seek 
essential care from a health care facility, but for those at the farthest distances the disparity in maternal and 
child services is staggering...our study illuminates new opportunities for the health system to close this gap."
- In 2014, LMH’s Research, Monitoring, & Evaluation team developed and launched "Last Mile Data", an innovative 
technology platform for data collection and reporting. Designed and optimized for use in remote areas, Last Mile Data 
is unique because it can be accessed without internet or cell service; a necessity when working in remote communities 
that lack connectivity. Our RM&E team is actively developing the platform to ensure that every member of the team, from 
CHWs in Konobo to the global senior leadership team, can access verified information from the field about communities 
and patient services. Last Mile Data is licensed open-source software that we aim to expand across Liberia as we scale, 
and ultimately use to serve remote communities worldwide.
- The team recently released findings of an mHealth feasibility study that piloted offline data collection using mobile 
devices. The system involves CHWs using digitized reporting forms, with the information transferred via Bluetooth to 
their supervisor's device, then onto the central database. The study concluded that the system can be quickly adopted 
by CHWs, ensures accuracy of diagnoses, improves data quality, and can work reliably in challenging conditions in 
Liberia's remote communities, which lack both electricity and cell coverage.
